From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin, mrs. Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number one 14. Recorded live
Monday, may 19, 2008. Support
for Hanselman it's as provided
by Tellerik rad controls. The
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support is
also provided by.net developers journal
the world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott talks website scaling with
Richard Campbell. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes. And
I'm sitting here at dev
teach Toronto with my good
friend, Richard Campbell. How are you,
sir? A legendary Richard. Oh,
well, thank you very much.
I think a little more
legendary to me. I, last
time I looked you were
keynoting. Not me. I'll keep
keynoting is funny because it's
the earliest talk of the
day. It's the shortest talk
of the day. I think
that's what most people look
for in a keynote brevity
short and early, so I
can sleep through it. That's
exactly what I gave to
people. So we were talking
about asp.net scalability earlier, and
I said, well, gosh, Richard,
that's all we did at
my last company. It was
make big stuff and see
if we could make it
bigger. And I know that's
what you're working on right
now. So let's talk about
making big applications. When I
think we take it from
a slightly different angle because
we're busy trying to find
ways to put that scalability
into an appliance, which is
really interesting when you first
told me about the stuff
that you're working on. I
was like, Oh, okay, this
is a module I install,
right? This is an HTTP
module, right? No, no. This
is a rack. It's a
pizza box that you put
into the rack and you
stick it in front of
well, and it's the location
is came, became a key
part of the whole equation
that, that made a big
difference, the way things go.
But this is not what
scalability is all about either.
I think scalability really comes
down to thinking through the
problem. I think it's a
very different way to think
about your software. When you
talk about how is this
going to behave with 10,000
people on it at once.
Right. Right. I think that
for a lot of people,
you know, one web server
and a nice beefy SQL
server is enough. I'm amazed
at how many, quite big
sites I've found where that's
exactly the scenario where that's
all, it's on the machine,
there's the para machines and
they're doing the job well
and there's scale. And then
there's a robustness. There's fail
over it. Reliability liability. I'm
consistently surprised at how many
sites don't have a geographic
fail over. Right. So almost
working on a banking software,
there was the here's the,
the data center. And then
there's the data center, 150
miles away in case this
one gets Newt. Yeah. The
whole disaster recovery model of
how do we swap over
in a hurricane? Yep. And
we actually had that. We
were, had a bank in
Louisiana. Yeah. For Katrina. I
did a lot of work
with companies like that through
the Caribbean. And that was
our normal pattern of behavior
was to always have typically
where's Bermuda and somewhere else,
because only one or the
other would be hit with
hurricane at any given time.
That's such a calculated. Yeah.
It was an interesting thing.
And for whatever reason, a
lot of the math of
hurricanes is still in my
head to this day, because
for eight months out of
the year, that's what we
thought about what happened. Watching
the CNN storm, watching you
going, Oh, that poor guy
in his data center. I
can just see that I
actually was. I always watched
the NOA website because they
were the ones with the
best predictions and the software
has gotten better and better
every year, but there's only
so many hurricanes and you
saw them coming from a
fairways away and you knew,
you know, roughly where it
was. And there was just
a fairly standard conversation that
went on about which point
do we switch sites? And
we do it well in
advance and typically do stuff
like fly all the hard
drives out. Really? You do
that ahead of time. Oh,
absolutely. We'd be, we would
be where the data center
would be down well before
the hurricane got there. All
right. Well, let's, let's get
back to basics. So when
scaling an asp.net website, most
people in my experience will
take their, their one machine
and their one SQL server.
And then they'll just start
adding style, web servers, just
adding stuff. I believe that
that they start out with,
well, as soon as we
have performance problems, we'll just
add a web server and
it's always in the context
of a performance problem. Site's
too slow. Yeah. I never
hear anybody come to me
and say, I think I'm
having scaling issues. It's always,
site's too slow. I want
to add another way. So
that's interesting. So what is
the difference between a performance
problem and a scale problem?
I think most people see
scaling problems manifest as perceived
performance problems. Exactly. During rush
hour, you know, whenever the
site is busy, the site's
too slow, right. And that's
the difference between a real
performance problem where one person
using it, it's too slow
versus, you know, thousands of
people using it. So there's
certain times of the day
it's too slow and that's
really how they see the
thing. And, but there's this
belief that if I got
another web server, everything would
be fine. And I think
that illusion exists really for
the one server people. Right.
Anybody who's actually gone through
this process quickly finds out.
Yeah. It's not quite that
easy. Yeah. I've actually been
doing scale for a lot
longer than, than most people
because I, I got put
into it in the, in
the nineties during the bubble.
Right. We didn't expect that
we would ever have to
deal with it. It was
kind of a trial by
fire. And I was working@acompanycalledeighthundreddotcomandeighthundreddotcomgotpurchasedbyoverstock.com.
They're all kind of part
of that thing. I think
it's, I think that's how
it was. I'm not sure
all the dot coms shoot
each other up. I'll probably
get an email from someone
who grew up in the
States. He did it all
wrong. That's not how it
worked out, but I was
part of the four or
five guys that worked on
800 dot coms website and
DVDs had just come out
and we said, let's have
a promotion, three DVDs For
a dollar, a wow. Back
in like 1999. Yeah. It
was all a classic ASP
commerce server. You know, it
was a, you know, Netscape
for, Oh man. And I
was in there optimizing tables
for perception of speed and
stuff like that. But what
was really interesting about this
problem is that what is
the typical behavior of a
person on your site, Right.
Be asking yourself that, just
sort of, how do people
go through your site? What
do they hit? Where are
they waiting? What do they
look at? You know, what
are the touch points? So
simply spoken in this instance,
a typical experience on eight
hundred.com was about 95% browsing.
Right? Sure. Read only type
things and then 5% getting
through the purchase process. Right.
So then the argument is,
well, which one of those
is more important? Well, they're
arguably both equally important, but
the purse, the perspective that
we had was once they
really want to give us
their credit card, it would
be our job to do
whatever we can to keep
that snappy executive to not
screw that up. Right. So
now change the scenario to
three DVDs for a dollar.
What happens? Well, browsing happens.
And then suddenly the, the
entire experience on the site
flips and 5% of the
people are looking and everyone
else just went, Yeah. Entire
scalability model for the site
completely changed. And we started
freaking out and it was,
And in hindsight, completely self
evident that this shouldn't have
happened. Yeah. But at the
time when it's like three
in the morning and it's
like, okay, it'll be a,
you know, in two hours,
it'll be, it'll be eight
o'clock on in New York. And
they're going to start again.
Yeah. Cause this was one
of those things where it
was spreading all over the
net for about a two
or three week period. I
was like, Oh my God.
yeah, it's crazy. And
they were coming up with
ways to like cheat us,
right. Multiple, multiple shippings to
one address and all that.
Yeah. Trying to find ways
to get deals. Now, were
you doing the, the, the
specialization thing where all of
your purchasing was on a
separate set of servers that
were running under HTPs and
that would make sense wouldn't
it? Yeah. It would make
sense. And one of, and
it's immediately, we were talking
about this something, and this
is one of those typical
things is we, we specialize
so that we can scale
independently. So if you said,
Hey, I want the purchase
process to be really fast.
It's great. I'll create some
HTPs servers. That's all they'll
do. And they'll be really
snapped because they're not as
busy. So that's the first
thing that we did. We,
everything originally had been under
www.eighthundred.com. Right. And then we
broke it out. We broke
it out actually into three
different kinds of servers. We
had our main browsing servers.
That's the 95% of the
core reading stuff. Right. And
that was not HTTPS. And
we took those pages that
showed the free DVDs and
made them static. Good. Now
that sounds cheesy. Oh no,
but brilliant. Really smart to
do rather than Even bothering
to cash them. Yeah. When
the site would go down,
it would have trouble getting
back up because one of
the things that people don't
realize when the site's being
pounded on is that you
hit somebody and they fall
and under a, the underload
you expect that guy to
not only be able to
get back up again, but
to be able to get
back up while still being
beaten. Yes. And, and, and
still Recover some to recover.
So it is so much
more difficult to get up
once you have stumbled. Yeah.
And I do find that
IIS goes into a tailspin.
I asked, has always done
that. And a lot of
application servers where there's a
process of startup, but nothing
can start up and start
serving pages faster than just
a website dedicated to serving
static files. So we basically
code gen a couple of
times a day as stock
changed these DVD pages, just
those pages. Right. Did some
redirects. So we had, those
pages will be static for
a little bit. We had
a server farm that was
just the shopping cart and
the checkout process. Right. And
then, because it was such
an intense product image intensive
site, we took images dot
eight hundred.com moved all of
the graphics away. Right. So
we had a whole farm
that was dedicated to that.
So this was our kind
of poor man's content distribution
networks. Sure. But it's, I
mean, it's classic tactics of
specialization. Yeah. Cause I find
IAS is dramatically a different
product when there's no asp.net
running on it, you can
do things differently. It manages
memory differently. There's a lot
of stuff that changes. If
you can get, have set
up, it just, you're just
serving images. That's all you're
doing. It's actually, that's one
of the things that I
think is really cool about
a server core is that
you can make this tiny,
tiny, tiny little windows box
doesn't even have a gooey,
nothing doesn't have, you know,
has like six modules installed,
like, you know, a rewrite
module and a static image,
a handler and a cash.
And like, that's it. Yep.
And install none of the
other stuff. Yeah. I think
windows 2008 is much clearer.
That IIS can be different.
Yeah. It's always been that
way. But I think people
don't really understand the, how
dramatically different you can make
IIS when you turn off
stuff and strip it down
to what you really, really
need and nothing more One,
and this is slightly off
topic. But the thing, in
my opinion, that holding Microsoft
back on that and that
respect is that it's still
confusing to me on how
I can buy that. Yeah.
I just want to buy
it and use it. And
at the same time they've
done, I mean, windows, That
was an eight, they've made
it pretty simple to buy
there's the core and all
the different additions. They all
sort of come together. But
again, I don't think people
really get what that is.
I think there's an OEM
opportunity there. Folks selling, you
know, the stripped down core
version, IAS web server. I'd
love to be able to
just have a, a regular
Joe, be able to go
and get an ISO and
run it to disc and
have a server core box
running immediately as a little
app server. So he told
that was one of my
war stories. And that was
gosh, now 10, 11 years
ago, You mean, like I
said, it was talking pre.net,
But within.net though, you've got
view state, you've got session.
One of the first things
that happens when you decide
to scale out rather than
scaling up and buying more
hardware is start thinking about
where is my session state
managed? Where's my cash manager.
Sure. And I think also
that getting session out of
the dotnet memory context and
when, as soon as you're
under any kind of load,
and I don't know if
you've done a lot of
research in this area, but
one of the things that
I've come to realize is
most of these web servers
running around out there, which
are 32 bit, they got
four gigs of Ram in
them. Yeah. When you actually
do the math and figure
out how much memory you've
got available to.net in a
clean configured machine, multi-core four
gigs around 32 bed. It
only comes out to about
800 megs of space I
can use in.net process. Process
processes typically purchased what's the
overhead. I don't know if
this is true or not.
I'm just seeing these yeah.
Ended up getting is how
much, when I'm looking at
perf Mont, I'm looking at
how much can I allocate
out before it starts G
seeing and going reserve it's
around 800 megabytes. And I
think the OS is eight
and got a whole bunch
that, you know, your overall
DLL loads, Like there's just
a bunch of stuff can,
so I see what you're
saying. Not per process really,
but yeah. Okay. 800 megs,
if you had nothing else
going, It's the stack. And
so when you throw session
into that space and caching
into that space yeah. And
then you put this thing
under some load, you run
out of memory to hurry.
It's funny When someone tries
to start aggressively caching, whether
that be output cash or
formerly caching, you know, from
a business perspective, that is
that this there's Cartesian product
That happens. Oh yeah. Oh,
I had a, An issue
on DAS blog a couple
of years ago where I
had a giant archives file.
If you go to my
blog and you click on
archives, it's about a half
Meg, but DAS blog has
this feature where we'll localize
the things that we can
for the visitor. So I'll
show dates German for German
viewers, right? Yeah. And what
was happening was someone would
say, Hey, your archives pages
in German, suddenly what would
have happened is that a
German showed up first. Right.
I cashed the page. So
then I go and say,
Oh, well, shoot. I need
to catch a different copy
of the page for each
person that hits site. Right.
We have sufficient traffic if
sufficient languages, then you think
about the 26 or some
odd number that.net supports of
arbitrary languages that they can
show the date four 26
different people from all over
the world decide to hit
the site, each one, getting
an old cached version of
the site. Next thing you
know, you've just blown 13
to 20 Meg Just on
those cash items for one
page. Yeah. Just one page.
So talking about a war
story, just this, this is
actually early this year I
was dealing with and I
don't do a lot of
consulting anymore, but this was
a favor. And it was
in a, it was in
an unusual place. I'm going
to leave out the names
to protect the guilty. And
they had, they had gotten
the caching hammer. They had
gone nuts and cashed every
page. They could lay their
hands on. And, and that's,
that's a really common, absolutely
name as we get into
this overenthusiastic use of caching.
And so the, the behavior
on the site, and this
was an application they installed
at customer sites. So they'd
done this huge caching rev
and for their biggest customers
behavior, they had about a
thousand users internal for about
a half an hour. When
they from a clean start,
the site would clunk. Yeah.
And then the excuse of
course was it's still popular
in the cash. Don't worry
because the cash will get
all pop. It'll be really
fast. And about half an
hour later, it would be
fast for about 10 minutes.
And then it would freeze
for about a minute while
the garbage collector ran through
and threw everything out of
memory. And then it would
clunk for half an hour,
right? All day long, You
set up cash. When you
set up session, people forget
that it's not just as
easy as putting something in
cash. It's about the life
cycle of that. When's it
going to go away? Why
is it going to go
away when it goes away?
How's it gonna come? And
how long is that going
to take? What is the
impact of that? So we
actually had a great time
instrumenting cash items. So how
many times does this cash
item gets hit? How many
times this cash out and
get destroyed? How many times
does it get repopulated any
given day? And just looking
at the data we got
from that and finding out
this cash item is repopulated
pretty much every time it
gets used, you know, the,
the, between the time that
the first time it's requesting
gets cash to the next
time it's going to get
requested again, it will be
thrown out of cash. Right?
Do not cash that. But
until we actually instrumented all
this caching code, we didn't
know. Right. And I could
actually turn around and I
find good cashing code confuses
junior programmers. Yeah. That whole
does the cash item exist.
Right. Test first and then
already doesn't exist. So now
thread blocks. So only one
person at a time can
do this and then check
to see if the cash
item exists again. So in
case somebody else came in
and as I was threatened
thread, I mean, that's the
code that junior devs fix
over and over again for
you. So anytime I can
eliminate that stuff, right. It's
a good thing. It cuts
down on the problems I've
got with other people trying
to understand it. Or somebody
adding a new page that
relates to a cash item,
but forgetting to do expiry
and on and on and
on. So I'm a big
believer in, can we Lynch
as much cash and code
as possible? Can we avoid
it? And can we insert
it in such a way
that we can actually see,
is this truly providing medicine
to us? Yeah. From my
point of view, I don't
feel I should have to
be writing that kind of
code. I like the idea
of being able to attribute
something or Mark something and
have it handled because this
is a common pattern. Yes.
And any time something is
a common pattern, I expect
the best practice to be
embodied within the library. Well,
I'm glad you think that
way, cause I'm making a
profit. Does that mean this
is not an 30 minute
ad for your product, but
I totally agree with you
that the, you mean the
other side of the caching
equation, there is this whole,
I have domain expertise. I
have a group of people
that are being really good
at building an app. And
then suddenly one of the
items on the feature list
is performance. Yeah. And when
it gets to the top
of the list, you need
it right now. Like it's
not like every other feature.
Yeah. I don't tend to
build this stuff in. I
mean, there's, if you start
thinking about performance early on,
you always get accused of
being a premature optimizer. Right.
Well, and wasting time. And
so, and there's merit to
that. I mean, there is
an angle on asp.net that
it's big is speed of
development. And that if you
don't ship these features, nobody's
going to care about your
app. Anyway, when I was
making a living a consultant,
doing exactly this stuff, you
know, you always start the
day off with, well, congratulations,
you have a good problem.
People care enough about your
app that they're making it
perform badly. And they're unhappy
that it is, you know,
the alternative is nobody cared.
That's a good point. I
mean, just start there recognize
you have a good problem
in play already. And then
go into now, you know,
how are we going to
resolve this? But it just,
you know, by the time
they actually get performance to
the top of the feature
list, they're in so much
pain. And the fact that
it's that it's no guarantee
you're going to get results
with. They don't know what
they gotta do. And it's
a different set of skills.
I just find it very
disruptive to get into performance
tuning. So let's just take
a very brief moment and
we'll thank our sponsors because
Pay the bills. Yeah. And
we'll be right back. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman with
a word from our sponsor.
Do you know how to
build web 2.0 Ajax applications
with web 1.0 components? You
really can't. If you want
to do the next generation
web applications you'll need next
generation components. Just like the
ones that our friends at
Telerik have got their rad
controls for ESPN and Ajax.
It's a huge pack of
web controls built on top
of asp.net. Ajax. That'll add
previously impossible performance interactivity to
your next project. The new
controls mirror, the Ajax API
from asp.net. So development is
really straightforward. The client scripts
are shared. So loading time
is not a problem. If
you just set a couple
of properties and you'll be
able to automatically bind a
web services for a really
efficient operation, the new rad
editor from ESPN Ajax, Telerik
loads up to four times
faster than before. And the
new rad grid handles thousands
of records and just milliseconds,
but as always, it's best
to try for yourself. So
you can visit  dot
com slash ASP, net Ajax,
and download a trial. Thanks
a lot. So we're talking
about performance and how using
junior programmers have trouble with
this. What are we not
teaching them in computer science
class is, is I've never
taken a performance tuning, you
know, Have we ever seen
a class on that? How
do you find, I mean,
I'm sure there probably are,
but I mean, in my
years in university, we never
had any, you know, here's
something broken. Find the, find,
the Bottleneck, willing to get
diagnostics all by itself. What
do I need to fix?
Yeah. Speaking of worst, I
was at a large bank
that I can't say the
name of that we spent
three days. It was one
of those things where, you
know, on Tuesday it gets
slow on this day of
the month.  it was
like, you know, basically when,
when the people get their
checks, they go and they
deposit them and they immediately
pay their bills. And that's
the busy day and something
was slow, but it was
a, it was a multi,
multi tiered system. So you've
got web servers talking to
business servers, talking to intermediate
queue servers, talking to mainframes,
Just trying to get through
to where the problems lie.
And it's a, at the,
at the point we were
at, it's a performance problem.
We have not yet identified
it as a problem. Right.
And I'm a really a
kind of Sherlock Holmes type
in the sense of well,
while people can throw out
highfalutin ideas about what they
think might be wrong, I
just say, all right, well,
let's just start at the
web server and let's look
at cues. It's all about
cues, right? Who's waiting how
many threads are in line
to get some actual work
done because there's only so
many processors on the machine
and there's only so much
work that mint can be
going on. Is the web
server working hard? Well, in
this particular instance, the web
server was chilling. Yeah. Which
is really interesting. People are
waiting 20, 30, 40 seconds
for the site to come
up and the web server
is not doing any work.
Okay. So what does that,
what does that tell us
Something I'll obviously somewhere else
is the bottom Something somewhere
else. If the web servers
were saturated at a hundred
percent, at least I could
do something about that. Sure.
I could get, well, you
know, that, that this is
where I got to go
start looking for the problem.
Right. So they were 30%,
40%. So then I think
to myself, well, what kind
of Nicks are in this
web server? Is this a
a hundred megabit or gigabit?
Is it saturated? It's been,
there's been a number of
times when I've worked on
sites when they've had a
hundred megabit cards and they
were saturated and no one
ever thinks that. Yeah, well
they never consider the fact
that that's a problem. I
ran into Iraq where somebody
had thrown a 10 base
T switch in the back
of the rack to do
some testing and left it
between the web server and
the outside connection. Oh my
God. So of course the
web server was never busy.
The site apart performed appallingly.
Yeah. And it wasn't until
we actually physically got there
and said, what is this?
Why is this here? That
we actually, you know, you
got to find those Walking,
these things back, you look
and being able to know
what to look at in
perf Mon and these aren't
windows specific. I mean, this
kind of scale work is
applicable in any operating system.
But the theory behind that,
the idea that, I mean,
just that very, very basic
assumption that you and I
just made that, well, the
CPU is not working. Therefore
we must be blocked waiting
for it to be somewhere
else. That's simple statement. Where
do you get that? Did
you just learn it in
the school of hard knocks?
I think so. I totally
agree that. And I also
think that the, the reflex
to check that the cords
are plugged in that is
my next saturated is the
machine on it is also
because you'll get burned by
it. One of these days,
that's the only time you
really grab on to, you
know, have we done these
dumb things? Where, what I
think is it's also as
we, we tend to, it's
usually not our problem. Right?
We've been brought to the
problem. I have this assumption
that the guy that I'm
working with is intelligent and
has pursued his obvious skill
set. So I'm going to
look in the unobvious skills.
Yeah. The idea that the
child that the power might
not be right Plugged in.
Someone told me once that
when you call tech support
and they'll tell you to
like pull the power cord
out and plug it back
in, right. Sometimes when what'll
happen is I'm not going
to check the power cord.
I mean, of course it's,
what's going on. Just do
it to humor me, check
the power cord. Sometimes it
won't be on, it'll be
okay. It will be on,
but they won't say anything.
They'll just say, Oh, I
jiggled the power cord and
everything's fine. Everything's fine now.
Thanks for your time. But
that gives them the out
the opportunity. So session state
can be a problem because
people forget that session state
lives. It has node affinity.
Yes. Well, and so we,
when we, and we started
on session a while ago
and I sorta jumped immediately
on the memory, consumption is
a big deal. I've seen
sites where we got session
out of process, but not
centralized. I still didn't. I
didn't care about my note
affinity. I cared about my
memory consumption. And so, I
mean, there's actually scenarios where
you can throw state server
on the web server and
you're better off well, it's
also, if you're just giving
it its own process, giving
you some process. So the
worker process can recycle So
that your session data, this
was a really huge thing
I have taken in the
last probably five years to
always running state server on,
in my development experience. Yes.
I do not run in
proxy session state. Yeah. Just
getting away from stupid serialization
mistakes. Right. Right. Because if
you don't Mark your object
to survive realizable, they'll never
make it over there. Yeah.
But it's one less thing
to worry about. And I've
had situations where we were
running live production sites within
product session and we needed
to go and switch over
to state server. Yeah. But
somebody didn't Mark one object
to realizable And all of
a sudden things go preserve,
and it's not like a
sign pops out of the
service saying something's not marked
say realizable. Right. You have
to go and hunt these
problems down. It's agonizing. Really.
So, I mean, I like
the idea that you always
out of process because as
you're develop, you'll catch those
mistakes. I would prefer that
that was the default. I
tend to agree when people
struggle over the performance loss,
you get going out a
process that it is a
hit, but don't you worry
about it. And the way
I usually describe it when
you're talking about scalability is,
you know, good scaling site
is not necessarily the fastest
site. It's consistent. It doesn't
matter whether there's one user,
10,000 users. I want the
distance between performance of one
user and 10,000 to me
as narrow as possible. And
I'll move both lines. I
will make one user slower
to get it closer to
the 10,000. And one of
the ways is I'm going
to go out of process.
You know, that's, that's, that's
a really good expectation to
have of your site. And
I think few people have
such what they would perceive
as lofty expectations. The idea
that, well, the site's running
a little slow. There's a
thousand people on there, right?
Why is it? It should
run as if you're the
only person on the site.
It should behave the same
all the time. I think,
I think consistency in terms
of customer comfort, where the
customers are your employee or
your CEO or an external
person, customer comfort is the
more important thing here. Consistency
matters. I think that that,
that Google does a good
job that I never think
to myself. Oh, well, Google
is slow today because there's
a lot of people on,
right. I've never ever thought
about that for a moment.
I've always felt like, especially
with Gmail as an example,
that I'm all alone. Yeah.
On my own private little,
yeah. Google server. And I
visualize this one little guy,
my little private server in
the sky. I know it's
not the case. It's probably
fragmented all over it. Doesn't
I also think that a
lot of people think they're
always all alone on the
internet. They rarely think of
what other people are there.
And that's why they complain
the site is slow. Right.
They never consider the idea
that maybe it's a thousand
people, you know, it's all
those other people that are
causing the problem. Right. It
just, so I don't think
people think like that, cause
it's probably don't. And so
talk about managing expectation. You'll
see that there are some
sites out there that will
let you know how many
people are on the site
right now. Oh, I love
that. And that's really forums
where they say there's 27
other people reading, reading this
right now. I should do
that on my, on my
blog blogs, Absolutely fruit idea.
And really what you're doing
is saying, well, how many
active sessions, what was the
last page you looked at?
I guess session count in
asp.net would be the best
way to do That would
be a way I do
think like last page viewed,
if you were keeping track
of that and sort of
a global level so that
you know, what page they
were on, but the feeling
of people being aware that
there's other people on the
site, I think it also
makes them more tolerant of
the fact that there may
be performance problems, right. It
would be a really, really
fun thing for the blog
software to take a blog,
take a blog like dusk
blog or subtext and make
it more social by saying
there are this many people
on the site and then
click on that and have
a list of the pages
that they're currently looking at
so that I can go
look at those pages too.
Well, this has been done
before. I'm sure it has.
I'm sure we could find
the software for, I mean,
great. Just put this on
your list for task blog
on a side bar, what
pages are currently being viewed?
I got to do that
tonight. That's a great idea,
But that breaks. So there's
a, there's, there's an, here's
an example. Now we'll get
back to the whole point
here where you and I
always end up just chatting
about randomness. We'll call this
the random show with Richard Campbell.
That that would be an
interesting problem to solve. Yeah.
Because how would that fundamentally
change the way the site
works? And Tom's blog is
an interesting application because we
don't have a database. A
lot of people, a lot
of people know this, but
a lot of people don't,
everything in DAS blog is
stored in XML. So, so
what are some things that
you might guess Richard are,
are difficult for DAS blog
to do that other other
websites might take completely for
granted? Hm. If you have
a little thing in the
corner, there there's a little
badge and you decided to
have, have the badge or
not have the badge. What
kind of things should I
be? I think the customers
Per, per user is going
to be a problem. Okay.
I think how I'm, I'm
curious, I don't know the
answer to this. I mean,
how are multiple people going
to simultaneously add comments to
things? So you're going to
have to keep them separate.
So we, yeah, I actually
have to have a, we
have one file per post,
actually one file per day,
right? So there's a, a
file that is the date,
the current date dot XML
and all of the posts
for that day are in
that file. And then there's
a separate parallel file just
for comments, but we basically
put them in an in
memory queue and we have
a have to go and
get in line. So we
have to serialize on that.
You've written your own version
of SQL servers, lazy writer.
Yep. You have a transaction
manager that's taking in all
those, those things in the
first place and the lazy
writer spooling them. It is.
And it's always immediate. It's
very, very fast, but it
is a point of serialization.
And this is another really
interesting thing. When, when doing
scale and thinking about how
expensive is it to read
versus how expensive is it
to write the idea that
I might have to get
in line in order to
write. Right. Well, and I
think these are classic scaling
problems where this is never
an issue until it is
an issue until enough people
are using the site at
the same time and you
get these random bugs and
they're relatively tough to recruit
Dos blog has actually, because
more people are reading my
blog in the last couple
of years, the us blog
has, has found a lot
of really interesting bugs that
you just don't find unless
people hit your site simultaneously.
And that's been really interesting.
So what we ended up
doing is people will put
stuff up and then I'll
just say, all right, well,
how are we going to
load test this? Well, we're
an open source project and
we're kind of not as
organized as we could be
and we don't have any
formal votes. So we throw
it up on my blog
and see if my blog
tips over. Yes. If you're
to have blog that can
survive it, most of the
customers of DAS blog are
going to survive as well.
Exactly. Yeah. That's kind of
the idea. So back to
my original question, it turns
out that if you put
a blog stats widget, it
just says, how many posts,
how many comments and let
something harmless most commented posts,
right? Seems like a trivial
thing. I'd like to have
a badge and a corner
that says most commented posts.
Just think about this from
a business person's perspective, right?
You paid me to write
DAS blog. We'll say you're
the business guy. And you
say, Hey, programmer, Scott, I
need you to put up
most commented posts. And then
you can have a top
10 list. And I go,
ah, yeah, we store all
of our posts and XML.
I have to go through
every single file on, let
me just do it. It'll
be fine. It'll be fine.
What could be the problem?
Well, so six years later
and 1800 XML files later,
right? Suddenly I realize programmers,
Scott realizes that we have
no database, right? And that
arbitrarily querying 1800 files is
difficult. So then what do
you start doing? Well, you
make a big index, you
start caching stuff, you're carrying
an aggregate and basically chasing
your tail. So at some
point, DAS blog will have
to move to a there's
something like leucine, where we
can cash all of this
stuff and have an index
of some kind. We have
a very internal custom index
that was built under pressure
because things started When you
were having this problem with
performance creep to the top
of the, so that's your
list. A lot of people
have blogs, that's on their
blog and we build it
and we have to, can
we catch it? The problem
is the building requires looking
at every single file on
the hard drive. And it
takes about 60 seconds on
my machine, which then times
out The, the query times
that query times out. Yeah.
And if I do it
in a, in a, in
a background thread, not as
part yet, not as kicked
off as part of a
page view, then that thread
can take the whole machine
down. Cause it's just frantically
opening all these files And
it's not a file handle.
Pounding must be unbelievable. Well,
and it's not just 1800
files, six years, times, 365
days a year, but it's
1800 times two. Right? Cause
you've got posts in one
file and comments and anonymously.
So then this really harmless
idea of most commented posts,
popular post blogs that's becomes
almost and most Painful part
of the whole app. Yeah.
And then it makes me
wish I had a database,
but that's the kind of
thing where if you, if
you didn't build up this,
a clean architecture that expected
that ahead of time, which
we didn't a business guy
asks what seems to be
a fairly innocuous question that
he's seen elsewhere. Oh yeah,
everyone else has this. Why
don't we, why don't we
not? That's kind of unique
to touch blog, but I
think that people find themselves
in those kinds of situations.
So at this, this banking
software company that I worked
at, it was very transactional
based. And you'd go to
the transfer money page and
you transfer money that you'd
go to the balancers page
and you look at your
balances and it was very
one page, one transaction. And
then the kind of the
whole portal thing started happening
at the early two thousands.
And people wanted to have
widgets that they could drag
around like, like live.com where
you've got, you know, half
a dozen gadgets in the
weather. And then this thing
becomes 10 transactions per page
to go and get information
like mortgage rates and balances
from other accounts and history,
That sort of dashboard composite
of a view. So suddenly
this one page one transaction
model becomes one page 12,
15 transactions. This is really
common dash blog, another perfect
example. You give them a
macro language and you let
them start talking arbitrarily against
your database. And then one
page one post turns into
multiple posts And you get
into dead locking scenarios where
two or three of these
aggregate things run at once
and they conflict with each
other. You've absolutely nailed it.
What's the problem with this
at this bank and company
was that we got to
go and get in line.
So we may start out
as 10 threads, but everybody
has to merge onto the
freeway conceptual singletons Way in
the app where when we
reach into this, we must
reach it in the same
order. And we must wait
and turn to we're all
finished. You never feel like
conceptual singletons at the time,
but they inevitably end up
like that. Yeah. I know.
I also think that the
serialization description is a good
way of describing that is
we need to serialize this
entire block of behavior. And
so, you know, you've got
to look at it as
a whole. I tend towards
the database view on these
sorts of things as well.
Right. And there were, there
were definitely times in SQL
server where the right thing
to do was to turn
up the serialization level, make
it more restrictive because that
forced people into order. And
it actually turned out to
be faster than fighting the
contention. Right. I've ever been
trying to do it to
say, okay, What did they
say that the, the optimal
number of threads in any
system is one. Yes. And
it's funny how things like
that are the case. Also
deferred execution is really important.
Yeah. Well not making stuff
synchronous. It didn't actually need
to be synchronous. Exactly. An
example. And I keep coming
back to tusk blog because
I come back to the
projects that I worked on
Clemens Vassar's realized very early
on that writing to the
log was important, but not
as important to getting the
page back to the user.
Right. So he was very,
very good at these fire
and forget threads, spin ups,
where he would just say,
alright, we just had a
referral show up. We just
had a track back or
whatever, right. Handle that. And
there is a possibility that
it might not work, but
you have to ask yourself
if this transaction fails, does
that mean that the users
should lose out? Yeah. Do
I really need to end?
Do I need to let
the user wait while I
make sure that transaction completes?
Yeah. It's not actually critical
to the deliverable. It is
critical to the net result.
That means two different things.
And I think we don't
pretend to prior tries our
work properly, where everything comes
out at the same priority.
What are some of the
kinds of problems that you
guys are bumping into? Cause
you're, you're working for a
company that makes a scale
appliance and you must be
talking to customers. You gotta
tell me some kind of
war story that you guys
are seeing in the wild
without telling me the names.
What's the, what are the
one of the classic asp.net
mistakes people are making when
trying to scale? Well, I
mean, certainly I think they're
finding that they're, they're battling
back and forth on overusing
technology, like, like caching and
or even folks that have
gone mad and stripped every
ounce of view state out
of their page and then
are frustrated with their rate
of development. Like there is
that sort of we're in
the, This battle. That's really
interesting. So you're saying that
people are getting, they're getting
frustrated with view state because
they don't necessarily have the
metrics to prove that it's
the problem that they feel
that this is so much
Gut behavior for performer performance
tuning, right. Not using empirical
data saying we have a
mandate to re minimum the
maximum amount of view state
in our pages, 20 K.
I love that totally arbitrary
number. Yeah. You know why,
why 20? And this page
is bad cause it's got
22 K of Houston. Well,
don't even know what's in
view state. Why it's there?
How much less, how to
dial it back for the
most part, most folks we've
seen that are trying to
reduce the state. Their only
mechanism is turn view, state
off on that control. Now
turn it off on this
control and yeah, No I
like to do is I
turn it off completely and
then turn it off, Turn
it on. Which again is
again, I think that's the
logical default, but it's not
the way that it works.
It should default that way.
Well, and that was a,
I think that's a really
tough thing because you just
made the ju the juxtaposition
between performance versus speed of
development. Right? Well, Microsoft, now
that I'm trying to understand
what they think about. They
have to make that distinction
between speed of development versus,
you know, the expectation of
the developer. They, they wanted
asp.net to just be one
of those things, right? You
can drag a button onto
a page and it works,
Right. It needs to just
work Pitt a success. I
fall into the pit of
success. Even if you screw
it up, it just works.
If I had to go
and then click the view
state on, on that control
to make that work. Now,
it's now it's an obstacle.
How many support calls and
so much Of, of Microsoft's
behavior is focused on the
first 10 times a customer
uses a particular, not the
last thousand and not the
last thousand. I also that
one of my favorite defaults
and I talk about this
in sessions all the time
that people don't know about,
but B when you really
think about it, realize it's
a good default, but seems
totally nonsensical is asp.net default
worker process restart is 23
hours. That's the default setting
for a cold install of
IIS. Every treaty three hours
restart the worker process. Really?
That is 20 minutes for
ISX book for restarting the
work process for restarting the
app pool recycling the app
pool. And I asked six,
but a fallback pool. It
was a, that was 20
minutes now, 23 hours. And
which, again, it's one of
those goof, but there's a
default, but the point is
he had to pick it
and I bet they killed
Arguing over what is the
default one? Should we restart
at all though? Well, I
mean, that is the point.
This is why do we
have this guaranteed default of
restarting the app? What happened?
Was it early on asp.net
was a mashup of calm
objects that people wrote and
remember all the calm, visible,
and how add calm reference
was so important. And lots
of people had those managed
unmanaged, unholy hybrids, bridges. Yeah.
That, yeah. Everyone had the
bridge project in 2003 that
they had to make and
they would leak. So you
re restart Only way to
know you were going to
get your memory back. Yeah,
I don't, I don't know,
but the idea of, of,
of, of a fresh restart,
but ultimately if you can
restart the worker process and
not lose anybody, right. Which
calls back to the idea
of having out of product
session, state, Generally everything that
is stateful in a, in
a context where he's not
going to get lost. Right.
I mean, really we'd like
to do that restart in
a sort of seamless way
where nothing was running it
at that moment, we, we
queued up the threads. We
do that. We restart the
process and then we unload
the threads and everything keeps
going and it doesn't work
that way, but it'd be
nice if it did. I've
got folks trying to use
the appliance, do those sorts
of tricks. I want to
catch the whole site on
the appliance and restart the
web server. The customers never
see it. I see what
you're saying. Yeah. We used
to do, you know, bleed
bleeding off of sites. Right?
So if you've got 10,
15 web servers in what
you can do is update
you rolling up Yes. Where
you set the server to
take no new sessions. And
so gradually all of the
sessions expire off and then
that servers available do the
update on, and you get
to a certain point where
now you flop because the
other set of servers and
then bleed out the other
lead out the rest. Amazing
to me, we were doing
this kind of stuff. And
in 97, 96, and I
don't mean to be a,
an elitist or anything, but
I am continually surprised how
many people would rather just
go in on Sunday morning
at 2:00 AM and kick the
feet Number of customers off,
but still kick them off.
Right. But somebody is having
a lousy experience, but bleeding,
you know, you'd get a
really good, you get a
really good IP load balancer,
like an F know a
local director. You can bleed
sessions off really, quite nicely.
Yep. Well then there's that,
there's also that app offline
thing that asp.net has where
there's that, that HTML file
that you can put in
the root that will keep
it from accepting any new
sessions. Right. But most people
just copy files over and
half my files over and
let the users have a
wacky experience for a few
minutes and go from there.
And I just, yeah, I'm
up in part of the
research we've done searching around
strange and so forth, finding
out how many customers actually
do have good instrumentation around
session and say, yeah, we're
running at about a 5%
session loss, but we don't
have enough complaints to bother
to fix it. 5% session,
5% of you saying, we'll
get one in 20 users,
lose their session in the
course of a day. Yeah.
But we actually just, cause
we know that doesn't mean
we're going to do something
about it. We're actually measuring
the number of calls we're
getting as our metric of
happiness. I was working at,
this is another large bank
and we were having a
pretty crazy day. And we
were basically working on the
engine of the car while
it was going downhill a
hundred miles an hour on
fire with a brick wall
at the bottom of the
Hill being chased by ninjas
who were also on fire.
So we're, We're trying to
work on this thing. And
we look at, at the
perf monitor, we're trying to
figure out, you know, how
many people are having a
bad experience. It was like
five or 6% errors. So
like five or 6% of
pages were resulting in it
like a 500 error, right.
An internal server. And they
were saying, well, you know,
no one's calling. Yeah. That's
the math, that's the real
match. Right. A second 5%
of people are having not
just a weird experience, but
a wholly and completely bad
experience, complete failure, complete and
utter failure. Why is that
acceptable? What happens if you
walk into a bank and
talk to a teller and
he's like, Oh, I'll be
happy to. And he falls
over and you're like, Oh,
I was just thinking just
one door, doesn't open for
one and 20. I got
halfway there. And the teller
just kind of talking nonsense
and fell over the teller,
walks away, right. Mid transaction.
That teller walks away. Doesn't
come back. I think I
like my language, something horrible
happens. And you've had that
happen. I was at, I
had, I had a really
bad experience in Detroit that
was at this restaurant. And
I had, I walked away.
I was the one that
I looked at the waitress
and I was just like,
I don't know what happened
there. Obviously we've gotten off
on the wrong foot and
there's no way that I
can recover from this transaction.
So I'm going to roll
back, just roll him back
To go to another restaurant.
And does that mean I'm
ever going to visit this
restaurant again? Probably not. Probably
not. Well, and of course
now you get into the
whole customer game of, you
know, you tell, you tell
somebody, although you're crazy this
way because of your bloody
blog that you only tell
a few people, you know,
when you do something right.
We tell a lot of
people with something wrong. I
have a song. I can
just think about how many
bad experiences people have Online.
But I also wonder if
that's an accepted part of
the practice too. It's getting
worse. I put a Macintosh
in my, in my kitchen
and I made it a
kiosk for the wife. And
she's mad at me because
of bunch of sites, actually
not just don't work well
on Safari, but they'll sniff
that you're on a Mac
and they'll say, Oh, well
this site only the library
in art city only works
at  Period. That's an
acceptable decision Rather than excluding
one browser for being funny,
we will, you, we will
pick one browser. Yes. And
all others are shoot. So
then what does she do?
She comes to me and
she says, Hey, this matters.
Yeah. Interesting. No, no, no,
no. The website side. Yeah.
But no, no, I don't
want a Mac anymore because
I can't get, I can't
check out books at the
library. Now It's so far
removed from the actual problem.
Like what a great way
to transfer the problem over
how many people believe that
the internet has these, these
significant unreliability problems simply because
people are figuring not enough
people complaining. Well, actually I
have a very nice readership
and who, whenever they see
an exception on my blog,
they'll give me a screenshot.
So I'll get a yellow
screen of death screenshot a
couple of times a week.
And I've got a particular
macro that does one of
the little ads that pays
for the bandwidth and the
blog that shows up in
the, on the corner every
once in a while, throws
an exception. And without fail,
my monitoring system is a
kind individual from overseas who
sends me this thing. And
then I sent yeah, yeah,
that happens sometimes. Right? I
know I need to go
back and fix the macro
and remove that call stack
that shows up, but you
hit refresh and it goes
away. Right. So, ah, who
has the, well it's already,
I've become, You become part
of it. Well, and that's
certainly part of the problem.
I've been the tech support
guy where we measured the
significance of a problem and
whether or not it would
persist long enough that someone
would actually complete a call
that if it was, if,
if this fixed itself within
60 seconds and we didn't
answer the phone by the
fifth ring until the fifth
ring, then we were okay.
Because by the time we
actually got out, they answered
the call. They'd already hit
refresh. And it had gone
away. Huh? Well, Richard, this,
this, the show didn't go
exactly. As I thought it
would never does with you.
And I am afraid. I'm
afraid. Not willing to try
this again. Cause I don't
know if I can call
this scalability with Richard Campbell. I
think I'm going to call
it war stories, war stories.
Well, Richard Campbell, thank you very
much for taking the time
to sit down with me
here at dev teach and
your product is what's the
name of your product? I
know the company is strange
Companies, strange loop networks, strange
networks.com and the product is
called the  for application
scaler Applications together, 1000 Strange
loop. Then we now have
a web services scale or
two called the Ws 1000.
Very great. And I suppose
the, if a Ws 2000
comes out, it's going to
be that much better. That
much bigger. Interestingly enough. You're
right. We may have one
soon because we've got people
who are using it so
much. They won in excess
Of 64 gigs of Ram
in it. Wow. I should
be a marketer. I just
gave you the name. You
just walked into my naming
strategy perfectly fantastic. Well, this
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.